Hi,
this is Craig Golightly, and welcome to Spring Framework: Documenting
Spring Data Rest APIs with Swagger and Springfox.
So why would you need to document an API? Most APIs are consumed by
users who did not write the API. Documentation helps answer questions
your users may have when they access your API.
It helps communicate what services your API can provide and how users
should access those services. And documentation is a key piece to ensure
your API gets used and is successful and also helps to identify changes
when you update your API. Keeping documentation up to date with your
code can be challenging.
Some documentation is better than no documentation,
but incorrect documentation can be worse than no documentation at all.
Once you start documenting your API,
you must maintain that documentation so that it stays accurate.
Since Swagger is generated from the source code,
you are less likely to introduce errors.
You also have the advantage of speed. The documentation ships with the code.
You don't have to wait for a team to create the docs after the API is released.
Swagger aims to be quick and easy,
almost a free way to get documentation for your API.
Let's take a look at an example API that uses Swagger and
Springfox to generate documentation.
What you're going to see is mostly the default documentation you get by
adding just a few lines of code to your Spring project.
Here is some documentation that was generated from
a Spring Data REST API project.
You can see some information about the title and the version,
as well as all of the exposed endpoints.
You can also see the models that are defined and used with the API.
Let's take a look at the Employee model.
It has a department, id, name, and title.
If we drill into, say, the Employee Entity,
we can see all of the different endpoints that are available.
Not only does Swagger document the API, it also acts as a REST client.
I can drill into one of the methods and see additional
information about that endpoint.
Back at the top, there's a Try it out button.
I could fill in some of the parameter values, I'll just leave
them blank for the default, and hit Execute.
It will then show us the equivalent curl and request URL command for what
we just did, as well as the response body and response headers. Note that
for this call there are zero employees.
I just started up the application, and it uses an in‑memory database,
so there's nothing there yet.
Let's go ahead and find the POST method and add an employee.
We'll hit the same Try it out button,
then edit the model for the values that we want.
I'm going to remove id since it's autogenerated.
Once the model is filled in how we want,
we'll click Execute, and we can view the equivalent curl and request URL,
as well as the response body and response headers.
Now if we called get employees again,
we'll see the employee that was just added: Craig,
developer, in the development department.
In this case, the employee entity is a Spring Data REST managed object.
All of these endpoints were automatically generated by Spring data
REST, and Swagger was able to pick these up with the help of
Springfox and generate all of this documentation.
It also works for other services that you may add to your project.
Let's take a look at the example‑service.
This just has a single get endpoint to get the
schedule. We can go in and try it out, then see the response.
Your schedule is Monday through Friday, 9 to 5.
Overall,
it's a great way to add some documentation to your API and
have a REST client to be able to do some exploratory testing and interact with your API.